---
title: E-MU 1820 in Debian
author: ogrim
layout: post
permalink: /2011/08/e-mu-1820-in-debian/
---
As I recently installed Debian on my main workstation, I wanted to make my beloved E-MU 1820 sound card work. The audio quality is much better than the integrated sound card on the motherboard, probably because of better digital-analog converters and more power to drive my headphones. The sound card did not work out of the box, so I had to start poking for data. We can get useful hardware information using lspci.

	lspci -nn

This gave a lot of output, so I used grep to find my sound card.

	lspci -nn | grep Creative</pre>

gave the following:

	01:09.0 Multimedia audio controller [0401]: Creative Labs SB Audigy [1102:0004] (rev 03)

Notice the `1102:0004`, which is the `PCI id`. Next I looked it up in Debians device database: <http://wiki.debian.org/DeviceDatabase/PCI> Strangely it did not match completely, closest find in the database was `1102:7004`. The output led me to search for `debian 1102:0004`, which gave just what I needed: a handy guide to compile and install the driver from scratch. Follow the guide and be on your way: <http://wiki.debian.org/snd-emu10k1> When using sudo, I have to qualify modprobe to `/sbin/modprobe`. If you are elevated by `su`, you can call modprobe directly.

Upon completing the guide, I restarted my system and was able to get the sound working by poking around in the Alsa mixer. I had to select the correct hardware and output settings. To change the default card we can modify the `alsa.conf` or `alsa-base.conf` (depending on what you have present) in `/etc/modprobe.d/`

List your sound cards with:

	cat /proc/asound/modules

Append `alsa.conf` or `alsa-base.conf` with:

	options snd_emu10k1=0

After rebooting the system, the clock rate had reset from `44.1Khz` to `48Khz`. This made the sound distorted. To fix it, set the clock rate with the following command:

	amixer -c 1 set 'Clock Internal Rate' 44100

Notice that `-c 1` corresponds to the sound card from `/proc/asound/modules`. Just add this command to `/etc/rc.local` to run it upon login. You must add the command before the `exit 0`, as that must be the last command in the file. This will ensure that the clock rate is set to `44.1Khz` every time you log in.

Lastly, I want to mention a useful tool for poking around with the routing matrix: emutrix. In the end, I did not need this tool to playback audio. However, if you are doing recording, it seems very useful to work out the routing. There are detailed installation instructions here: <http://code.google.com/p/emutrix/wiki/InstallGuide> Just make sure you check it out from the `svn-repo`, as the releases does not support multiple sound cards (which every motherboard has this these days (increasingly on graphics card too, through HDMI)).

**Update 31th August**

Using emutrix, I poked around a bit to fix output to my loudspeakers. Only headphones was working previously. Thanks to emutrix, it was very fast and simple to determine the routing, before writing the commands. I now have this in my `rc.local` as well:

	amixer -c 1 sset 'Dock DAC1 Left' 'DSP 0'
	amixer -c 1 sset 'Dock DAC1 Right' 'DSP 1'
	amixer -c 1 sset 'Dock DAC2 Left' 'DSP 0'
	amixer -c 1 sset 'Dock DAC2 Right' 'DSP 1'
	amixer -c 1 sset 'Dock DAC3 Left' 'DSP 0'
	amixer -c 1 sset 'Dock DAC3 Right' 'DSP 1'
	amixer -c 1 sset 'Dock DAC4 Left' 'DSP 0'
	amixer -c 1 sset 'Dock DAC4 Right' 'DSP 1'
